pure-mode (#1)
VincentBailly/rfcs-1: accepted/0034-pure-mode.md

# Pure mode

## Summary

This RFC is a proposal to add a new opt-in installation mode.

This mode would be the missing ingredient to make workspaces truly scalable.

## Motivation

The introduction of workspaces in npm v7 brought the ability to split large codebases into smaller pieces of code with declared dependencies between them.

> Several build tools took advantage of these declared dependencies to split the builds into multiple steps (one per workspace) which could be cached or run in parallel. This caching and parallelism usually improves significantly build performance.

Author: ```suggestion
Several build tools take advantage of these declared dependencies to split the builds into multiple steps (one per workspace) which could be cached or run in parallel. This caching and parallelism usually improves significantly build performance.
```

> The current default installation strategy does not properly communicates to NodeJS the information about the dependency graph.
> NodeJS having an innacurate view of the dependency graph leads the build systems to wrongly skip build operations, leading to risk of bugs slipping through.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current default installation strategy does not properly communicates to Node.js the information about the dependency graph. Node.js having an inaccurate view of the dependency graph leads the build systems to wrongly skip build operations, leading to risk of bugs slipping through.

```

> The installation mode proposed by this RFC would communicate accurately to NodeJS the dependency graph, allowing build tools to correctly reason about it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The installation mode proposed by this RFC would communicate accurately to Node.js the dependency graph, allowing build tools to correctly reason about it.
```

## Naming

The proposed name for this mode is `pure-mode`, meaning "pure" as in "no side effects". This name comes from the parallel with functional programming; in functional programming, functions don't have side effects, in `pure-mode` workspaces have no side effects.

> To make the discussions more efficient, we could also name the current default installation mode of npm. We will call this mode `hoisted-mode` as packages are shared accross workspaces by hoisting them to the root of the project.

Reviewer 2: change **`accross`** to **`across`**

## More on the problem

> Packages and workspaces declare their dependencies to npm by using special fields in their package.json. The NodeJS runtime is unaware of these special fields, instead it uses a [module resolution algorithm](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html) to determine the meaning of a module importing another module. npm bridges this gap by converting the declared dependency graph into a folder structure which makes sense to NodeJS. This operation is call `reification`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Packages and workspaces declare their dependencies to npm by using special fields in their `package.json`. The Node.js runtime is unaware of these special fields, instead it uses a [module resolution algorithm](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html) to determine the meaning of a module importing another module. npm bridges this gap by converting the declared dependency graph into a folder structure which makes sense to Node.js. This operation is call `reification`.
```

> When converting the dependency graph to a folder structure, the `hoisted-mode` is losing information. Multiple different dependency graphs can be converted to the same folder structure. Since the folder structure is all that NodeJS uses to resolve modules, NodeJS misses some information about dependencies. This loss of information is most frequently visible through the fact that workspaces are able to successfully import the dependencies declared by other workspaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When converting the dependency graph to a folder structure, `hoisted-mode` loses information. Multiple different dependency graphs can be converted to an identical folder structure. Since the folder structure is all that Node.js uses to resolve modules, Node.js misses some information about dependencies. This loss of information is most frequently visible through the fact that workspaces are able to successfully import the dependencies declared by other workspaces.
```

### Forgetting to declare dependencies

> When workspaces can successfully use code of a package without having a dependency on it, people keep forgetting to declare their dependencies. This lead to situations where updating the dependencies of one workspace breaks a simingly unrelated workspace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When workspaces can successfully use code of a package without having a dependency on it, people forget to declare their dependencies. This lead to situations where updating the dependencies of one workspace breaks a seemingly unrelated workspace.
```

It is worth noting that static code analysis tools can help significantly reduce the frequency of these mistakes.

### Duplication

The `hoisted-mode` is not always successful at sharing common dependencies. Conflicts in versions lead to packages being installed multiple times on disk. These conflicts become more frequent when the project scales. The frequency of these conflicts can be reduced by an effort to align dependencies' versions across the project.

These duplications come with the following cost:

- Performance degradation of the installation phase
- Inneficient disk usage

> - Performance, memory cost at runtime as NodeJS sees duplicated modules as two different modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Performance, memory cost at runtime as Node.js sees duplicated modules as two different modules.
```

### Tools crawling the node_modules folders

> Certain tools implement their own module resolution algorithm instead of the one provided by NodeJS. One of the motivation for a tool to implement its own resolution algorithm is that it can add more feature to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Certain tools implement their own module resolution algorithm instead of the one provided by Node.js. One of the motivation for a tool to implement its own resolution algorithm is that it can add more feature to it.
```

> Crawling the node_modules folder is such a feature used by certain build tools. This feature means that the mere presence of a package in a `node_modules` folder will have an impact on the output of a workspace. This means that any modification of a project's `node_modules` folder is possibly a breaking change to every workspaces in this project, regardless of the dependency graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Crawling the `node_modules` folder is such a feature used by certain build tools. This feature means that the mere presence of a package in a `node_modules` folder will have an impact on the output of a workspace. This means that any modification of a project's `node_modules` folder is possibly a breaking change to every workspaces in this project, regardless of the dependency graph.
```

For example, the TypeScript compiler by default includes to its compilation _every_ package in the folder `node_modules/@types` without any explicit import statement needed.

## Rationale

The [import-maps](https://github.com/WICG/import-maps) standard is a very good tool to communicate the dependency graph to NodeJS. But because this standard is not yet implemented in Node.js, npm needs an alternative way to solve the problems stated earlier.

The goal is to provide an accurate dependency graph to Node.js while still relying on Node.js current module resolution algorithm.

> We deem valuable to invest the time implementing the `pure-mode` now knowning that import-maps are coming because most of the implementation will be re-usable to implement a `import-maps-mode`.

Reviewer 2: change **`knowning`** to **`knowing`**

> There are already two compeeting solutions out there which implement a `pure-mode` ([pnpm](https://pnpm.io) and [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com)). We decided to choose the pnpm approach for the following reasons:

Reviewer 2: change **`compeeting`** to **`competing`**

This structure may seem more complicated than necessary. The reason for this complication is to make it possible for a package to import itself using its own name. For example, the following code `require.resolve("foo");` in `node_modules/.npm/foo@1.0.0-1234/node_modules/foo/bar.js` will correctly return `node_modules/.npm/foo@1.0.0-1234/node_modules/foo/index.js`.

#### Peer dependencies

Peer dependencies are resolved by npm and treated as normal dependencies.

For instance, the following dependency graph,

```
 foo@1.0.0  ────┬─────> bar@2.0.0 ──( peer dependency )──> baz@^1.0.0
                │
                └─────> baz@1.3.0

```

will be converted to the following:

```
 foo@1.0.0  ────┬─────> bar@2.0.0 ────> baz@1.3.0
                │
                └─────> baz@1.3.0

```

### Edge cases

#### Peer dependency conflict

When a peerDependency can be resolved by more than one version, virtual packages will be created, as many as they are versions resolving the peer dependency. These virtual packages will be the same, with the difference that their dependencies will be different and as a consequence their hash-based name will be different.

> For instance, the followind dependency graph,

Reviewer 2: change **`followind`** to **`following`**

```
 cat@1.0.0  ────┬─────> baz@1.5.0
                │
                └─────>
                        bar@2.0.0 ──( peer dependency )──> baz@^1.0.0
                ┌─────>
                │
 foo@1.0.0  ────┴─────> baz@1.3.0

```

> will be consverted to the following:

Reviewer 2: hange **`consverted`** to **`converted`**

```
 cat@1.0.0  ────┬─────> baz@1.5.0
                │
                └─────> bar@2.0.0 ────> baz@^1.5.0

                ┌─────> bar@2.0.0 ────> baz@^1.3.0
                │
 foo@1.0.0  ────┴─────> baz@1.3.0

```

#### Circular dependencies

Circular symlinks are allowed by the OS and _most_ tools work well with them. So this is not a major concern.

> Since the hash of a package contain its dependencies, circular dependencies make the calculation of this hash more complicated. Here is [an article](https://www.fugue.co/blog/2016-05-18-cryptographic-hashes-and-dependency-cycles.html) explaining how to hash a graph with cycles.

Reviewer 2: change **`contain`** to **`contains`**

   │
   └─> workspaces / ─┬─> foo / ─┬─> [ content of workspace foo ]
                     │          │
                     │          └───> node_modules / ─┬─> A ( symlink to ../../../node_modules/.npm/A@1.0.0+B@1.0.0-21f95f7/node_modules/A )
                     │                                │
                     │                                └─> B ( synlink to ../../../node_modules/.npm/B@1.0.0-0d98ab/node_modules/B )
                     │
                     └─> bar / ─┬─> [ content of workspace bar ]
                                │
                                └───> node_modules / ─┬─> A ( symlink to ../../../node_modules/.npm/A@1.0.0+B@2.0.0-66fe689/node_modules/A )
                                                      │
                                                      └─> B ( synlink to ../../../node_modules/.npm/B@2.0.0-a2ia56/node_modules/B )

```

## Performance

Compared to the current npm installation strategy, this proposal reduces package duplication, making the installation process faster. On a prototype, this installation strategy brought down the install time from 6 to 2 minutes on a large monorepo of 500+ workspaces.

> The implementation can easily be applied to projects which don't use workspaces to get some perf benefit. Though it is unknown what this perf benefit would be in nono-workspace project.

Reviewer 2: hange **`nono-workspace project`** to **`non-workspace projects`**

## Prior Art and Alternatives

### [pnpm](https://github.com/pnpm/pnpm)

Package manager with a `pure-mode`.
This RFC is mostly inspired by pnpm.

### [ied](https://github.com/alexanderGugel/ied)

Package manager with a `pure-mode`.
Similar to pnpm but unmaintained.

### [nix](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Nix)

Functional package manager. Can work with npm packages (eg. [node2nix](https://github.com/svanderburg/node2nix) or [nixfromnpm](https://github.com/adnelson/nixfromnpm) )

### [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/)

Package manager with a `pure-mode` and project manager.

### [Import maps](https://github.com/WICG/import-maps)

Standard supported by [a few browsers](https://caniuse.com/import-maps) and [deno](https://deno.land/) which makes it possible to implement `pure-mode`.

## Unresolved Questions and Bikeshedding

- Should we use symlinks or junctions on Windows? Both of them have drawbacks:

  - Junctions have to be representated by an absolute path, this means that junctions cannot be committed to git or packed into a package.

>   - Symlinks can only be created in elevated shell [or when Windows is in "devloper mode"](https://blogs.windows.com/windowsdeveloper/2016/12/02/symlinks-windows-10/#LCiVBWTgQF5s7fmL.97).

Reviewer 2: change **`devloper`** to **`developer`**
